What’s two plus two?

That’s how the book starts. A computer asking what two plus two is. The book starts with a man waking up clueless as to what’s happening. He’s repeatedly asked basic questions by the computer to make sure he’s in the right condition to operate the spaceship (we later find out he’s in a spaceship) - Hail Mary. He’s got a bit of amnesia. Little by little, until the end of the book, he remembers how he got there and how he has the knowledge that he has. 

Ryland Grace is a high school teacher, a good one. He loves his students and they love him. Before teaching, he wrote scientific paper claiming that life might not require water to survive. Not human life but any other life. He was a microbiologist if I’m not wrong but he has a pretty good idea about physics as well. The whole book includes a whole lot of science. But it’s not completely foreign, you can still understand probably most of it even if you’re not in the field.

Dr. Grace finds out two other humans in his ship, a Chinese man - Yao - and a Russian lady - Ilyukhina. Soon he also finds out that they’re dead. He’s alone in the ship with no idea what’s happening and where he’s going. The whole story builds up by giving information little by little to the reader which keeps them hooked on to each chapter and look forward to the next. Almost like a cliffhanger.

As we move further into the story, we see that the sun has been slowly dimming down, they didn’t really know why this is happening. This discovery was made by another program. They found something unusual - a set of black dots moving. As if… they are alive. Back on earth, they get the samples. Dr. Grace has been appointed for the mission by Eva Stratt, woman with all the authority in the world. Well, the reason this mission is important is because if the suns shuts off, earth is finished. Crops die, animals die, humans die. Grace has only been appointed to do the research, not to be an astronaut. He starts working on the black dot samples. He names them (*drumrolls*) Astrophage. The Astrophage is basically taking away the light from the sun.
From months of working Astrophage, Grace and rest of the scientists all over the world learn a lot about it. Grace is the first one to find out how they breed and how you can replicate that process on Earth. He flies different places, meets different scientists and engineers working on Hail Mary. It’s a secret mission by the way.
With all the findings, they have an interesting find wherein there’s a star far far away from our solar system that’s just like our sun but isn’t affected by the Astrophages. The star, Tau Ceti. To find out why and see if a similar solution can applied to our solar system, the mission is started. Now that I think about it, it seems very broad of a reason to create such a crucial long term mission with a hope that they’ll find a solution. In the book’s defense, it was mentioned that it was a one way ticket with no hope of return for the astronauts. 
How does the help earth at all? The spaceship was equipped with these probes or machines called the Beetles. Named after the Beatles. There were four units, each powered by their own set of Astrophages to return 5TB worth of data in each of the Beetle. These Beetles were how the astronauts would send back their findings to earth. It would take 13 years for the ship to get to the destination and another 13 years to send back the information. Given the time dilation, it would mean about 4 years one way for Grace. That was pretty much the mission.

Grace sees the star from his screen inside the control room and thinks it’s the sun. Later he realizes it’s not and he’s in a completely different solar system than his own. Few days later or maybe weeks later when Hail Mary is stopped with the view of Tau Ceti. The ship’s alarm systems go off. When Grace checks the radar he sees another object in close proximity. It’s named Blip A on the screen. It closes in and stops. When Grace looks through his window it looks something like an alien ship. Almost 3 times the size of Hail Mary but way flatter as if it was designed bad. He thrusts forward the Hail Mary by a few meters. The alien ship does the same.

The alien ship sends a cylinder onto the Hail Mary’s side. They’re trying to communicate! Takes more than an hour for the cylinder to reach. Grace gets into his EVA (astronaut suit) and opens the airlock to receive it. He retrieves the cylinder and gets back in. It’s very hot.

*I feel like I’m literally rewriting the story so I’m gonna warp into high level now*

There’s really an alien! Grace and the alien exchange metals or whatever material at first and communicate about the chemistry of each their current environments. Once the intent seems non hostile, the alien sets up a tunnel from his ship (Blip A) to Grace’s. That’s when they really start communicating, they still stay in their environments. Rocky, the alien, has built it that way. Think of Rocky as a big spider. Big big. Rocky communicates in sound thats unlike human’s voices. It’s more like chords. Each word is a chord. They first start off with numbers and then move on from there. Rocky is from a planet called Erid. You can call him an Eridian.

Rocky has the same purpose. One of his solar system’s star is also dimming down like our sun. The star: Adrian. Named after Rocky’s mate (wife). To conquer this problem together, Rocky settles himself on the Hail Mary by setting up an environment where he can live. What I mean is, he’s from another planet. His living conditions are way different. If he’s exposed to earth’s atmosphere, he can die.

*I feel like I’m explaining everything but the plot, well there’s a lot of science that I won’t do justice explaining, nor can I even explain. Like what the hell is a neutrino*

Anyway, they find a nearby planet which has  yet another life containing cell or creature. It’s close to Tau Ceti. Turns out, the reason Tau Ceti isn’t dimming down is because of these little cells. They start their journey to the planet in order to get some samples. It’s not easy to get it without entering close to the planet’s atmosphere. But it needs to be done. Rocky and Grace work on a chain long enough to drop a sampler down from the ship. It takes them lots of hours. They also had to orbit the planet in angle to make sure they get that close range. They manage to get it but on their way out, they are alerted about failing fuel bays. The ship is now in a bad condition. At a point, the control room chair comes out, Grace is stuck in a position where he can’t breath because the chair is pushing towards him with force. When it looks like it’s almost the end, he starts smelling lots Ammonia not knowing where it’s coming from. Then he sees Rocky out of his side, out to help Grace. He helps him and then falls down. Grace somehow gets everything back to normal and tries to help Rocky. If at all he can, he puts him back to his place and tries a few things which later we find out that it almost killed him. There’s humor at times in the story which is nice.

They make their way back to where they had parked Blip A. They test the samples and thankfully it’s in one piece. The find out that the cell from the planet (can’t remember the name) can actually kill Astrophages! That’s all they want to do. They test it in Venus atmosphere (because that’s where the Astrophage breeding is happening or maybe the Petrova line was there, not sure). They also set up another test to try the cell with Erid’s star Adrian. When they do these tests, they find that the cells - Taumoeba - instantly die. That is no good because they want it to survive in those atmospheres for the whole thing to work.
With lot of testing they find that nitrogen is what’s causing the Taumoeba to die instantly. So they start breeding Taumoeba with some resistance to nitrogen. It’s a gradual process, takes many tests, but they get a set of Taumoebas fully adapted to the required atmospheres. That’s great! They’ve contained all of these Taumoebas within a Xenonite container made by Rocky.

Then comes a problem. Did I tell you the whole ship was powered by Astrophages? Well, there was a Xenonite leak. It ate up some of the fuel Astrophages. PANIK! They had to jettison some other the fuel bays and clean out from the inside to remove all of the  rogue Taumoebas.

After that, Rocky gets his container of Taumoebas to save his planet. And Grace gets his. Grace doesn’t have enough fuel to go back home but Rocky says he’s got lots of Astrophages he can lend. Happy Grace takes it and starts his way back to earth. Rocky goes his way.

Few light years or minutes away, there’s another alarm. Grace finds out that there’s another Taumoeba leak in the ship. Bad bad bad. He spends some time trying to figure out why. He finds out that the Xenonite has been the reason Taumoeba has been leaking. It can be easily contained with plastic or glass or epoxy but Xenonite was a new material to him, he had no idea what it was. The Taumoeba while evolving found a way to bypass the Xenonite. That was why it was leaking. He secured the samples into a proper container but then he remembered… Rocky will have the same issue. Rocky is an engineer and not a scientist to find out the issue. Grace has to make a decision whether to go home or help Rocky and never get back home again.

I must say, they had a nice friendship built over the months. Like a good friend, Grace set his course back to Rocky. It took some finding but he found Rocky’s ship. Rocky was in a bad state because his fuel was also running out due to the leak. Grace told him why and decided to help him. Rocky probably just came over to Hail Mary.

Before Grace set his course to Blip A, he sent the Beetles with the Taumoeba samples so they can use it to save earth.

16 years later, Hail Mary is in orbit around Erid. Grace lives in Erid in an area made specifically to support his life system. They’ve made food that he can consume, calls it the MeBurger. Because it’s his own meat.

The story ends with Grace going back to teach Erid kids… 

Beautiful ending, loved the book.