# PGP - Pretty Good Privacy - Encryption

PGP is an encryption method that uses both symmetric and asymmetric (public key cryptography) encryption. Mostly RSA is used to generate the public/private keys

## How it works?
Let's say I, _Shahlin_, want to start receiving some confidential files or emails from _John_. I will have to do the following steps in order to use PGP encryption for the communication.
> Note that the steps below assume that it was done manually via a terminal (or some software)

1. I will first generate 2 set of keys - Public and private keys
  - The private key, I will store securely within my system
  - The public key, I will share with John (or whoever I want to receive confidential data from)
2. John will draft an email - prepare the data basically
3. Next, John will generate a random session key (which is meant for one time use)
4. John will use this newly generated key to encrypt the email
5. John will then encrypt the session key itself using the public key that I have shared with him
6. John will send me the email including the encrypted session key
7. I will decrypt the session key using my private key
8. I will decrypt the email using the session key
9. Read email, DONE!

In other words:
- Private and public keys are generated by recipient. The public key is shared with senders
- Sender generates random key and encrypts data with it
- Sender encrypts the random key itself with the recipient's public key
- Sender sends the data along with the encrypted random key
- Recipient decrypts the random key using the private key
- Recipient decrypts the data using the random key

## Why is it good?
- It has advantages of both symmetric and asymmetric encryption. It is fast like symmetric and secure like asymmetric encryption
- Public key encryption (or asymmetric encryption) is computationally expensive when it comes to encrypting large amounts of data. Just encrypting a small random key with the public key is much more quicker
- It's secure because it's still using a pair of public and private keys which means that not everyone can decrypt the data even if the public key is exposed
