# See through people's masks
- We as humans, learn to fit in to groups by wearing same clothes and speaking the same language
- We become good at flattering people
- We learn how to conceal our feelings
- Our task as students of human nature should be first, to understand and accept the theatrical quality of life. How we need to use this quality to attract attention, dominate the limelight and make yourself sympathetic. Second, we should not be naive about people's appearances. We should become the master decoder of their true feelings
 
## Three aspects to this law
### Observational skills
- Pay attention to microexpressions
- Try this exercise with someone, start observing their facial expressions, voice (changing in pitch), body language, etc
- Be relaxed and open to what you notice
- Make sure you listen to what they're saying and make it clear that you're doing so. This will relax them and potentially leak out some non verbal cues
- Also know the person's baseline before you observe them. Once you're aware of their baseline, it should be easier to notice any deviations
- Be careful about your biases when observing
- Keep your personal preferences and prejudices about the people out when observing
- Also observe yourself from time to time and how your expressions and body language changes in certain scenarios
 
### Decoding Keys
- **Dislike/Like**: People give out clear indications through their body language and expression when they like or dislike something. Observe these indications. For example, when someone genuinely smiles, their muscles around the eyes widen, pull cheeks upwards, etc. Understand these.
- **Dominance/submission cues**: People perform actions that often tells us if they are dominant or submissive. For example, if people are usually late, it might be showing some kind of dominance (intentionally or not). Even while speaking, maybe if the person tends to interrupt more often, that could be some kind of dominance as well. 
- **Deception cues**: People are sometimes acting out of their normal or just being extra. It can be smiling alot or being extra friendly or being extra entertaining etc., whereas all of this is just a deception and not the actual reality. This is sometimes noticeable through their body language. If their eyes are trying to fool you, maybe their mouth will quiver. The best way to go about these scenarios is by just letting them continue whatever they are talking about, and then you ask them an uncomfortable question so that if they are deceiving, they will pretty much freeze and won't have a quick response.

### The Art of Impression Management
- Master the nonverbal cues
- Be a method actor
- Adapt to your audience
- Create the proper first impression
- Use dramatic effects (know how to selectively absent yourself, learn to withhold information, make your behavior less predictable) 
- Project saintly qualities
