# Determine the Strength of People's Character

## Keys to Human Nature
- It is very unlikely that a person makes a mistake or takes some action only once in their lifetime. They are most likely to do it again. Intentionally or not.
- Our work is two fold:
    - Understand our own character clearly
    - Develop the skill to read other's characters
- People usually are able to cover up their weaknesses by presenting something more desirable or positive. We need to be aware of these illusions/facades.

## Toxic Types
1. **The Hyperperfectionist**: Loves power and control / micromanagers
2. **The Relentless Rebel**: Compulsion to feel superior, condescending. In their childhood, a parent probably disappointed them. They came to hate everyone in power
3. **The Personalizer**: They seem nice but they take everything personally. As children, they felt they didn't get enough from their parents (love, attention, etc)
4. **The Drama Magnet**: As children, they realized that the only way to get things was to trigger their parents by making a scene about something
5. **The Big Talker**: These people seem ambitious and have big dreams but no backing data to support their work. It's all talk. They probably had parents who would turn on them suddenly for smallest of things
6. **The Sexualizer**: The have a high sexual energy coming from a dark place. Their relationships are mainly sexual than anything. As children, they probably suffered sexual abuse in some way
7. **The Pampered Prince/Princess**: They have a baby like behaviour when they don't get something. As children, their parents gave them everything they asked for and protected them from all the harsh conditions.
8. **The Pleaser**: They are nice to you but not out of genuine affection. It's mostly their defense mechanism. As children, they probably had harsh and punishing parents
9. **The Savior**: These type of people are generally the caregivers of their own parents or siblings. They get satisfaction from rescuing people but they might have the compulsion to control people
10. **The Easy Moralizer**: They seem moral but they don't follow their own teachings

Goal is to be **The Superior Character**. Do not be ignorant and in denial about your character. Find out which of the above toxic type you belong to (or a mix of some), start addressing them. For example, if you have a rebellious character, you can channel it towards something innovative instead of insulting or alienating people. If you find faults in things, start finding solutions for it instead of just complaining.
