# Elevate Your Perspective
## Keys to Human Nature
1. Facing a problem/conflict or some exciting opportunity, we train ourselves to detach from the heat of the moment
2. We then deepen and widen our perspective. Looking for different possibilities, other possible motivations for the involved people to do what they've done

## Four Signs of Shortsightedness and How to Overcome Them
1. **Unintended Consequences** - Taking actions without thinking of the unintended consequences that might ensue. These actions are often the first few thoughts that come to our head, we react without thinking of the root of the problem. Solution is dig deeper into the problem and understand all the possible consequences before making a decision
2. **Tactical Hell** - Wanting to prove you're right, you take the actions which move in that direction. It's no longer about solving the issue at hand but about imposing your point. Solution is to take a step back temporarily from these battles, put your ego aside and get some perspective on what's happening and then plot a strategic response
3. **Ticker Tape Fever** - Due to the enormous amounts of information present on social media, we get used to getting all the news quickly. We feel connected to everything. But behind the scenes, it's reducing our attention span and our tolerance when things take slightly longer. Solution is to develop patience. Take a day or two before taking an action. Constant feed of information can be eliminated to slow things down in life
4. **Lost in Trivia** - Taking in all the information as if they are all important. Even in terms of work, you prioritize everything as you're unsure of what's actually important. One way to solve this is by knowing what your goals and what you can achieve and also delegating some of the tasks to subordinates

## The Farsighted Human
- Your goal is to widen your relationship to time and slow it down
- Awareness that a year from now, the current problem that you're facing will hardly seem any important
- This will lower your anxiety and adjust your priorities

_The years teach much which the days never know_

\- Ralph Waldo Emerson
