# Soften People's Resistance by Confirming Their Self-opinion
## Keys to Human Nature
- People have a perception about themselves, this is called _self_opinion_
- When you try to convince people of something, one of three things happen:
  - You might inadvertently challenge a particular aspect of their self opinion, leaving them more defensive/resistant
  - You can leave their self-opinion in a neutral position. Neither challenged nor confirmed
  - You can actively confirm their self-opinion. Their minds will open, making the susceptible to suggestions
- Basically, give people a sense of security
- You might ask, why can't we just be honest and straightforward and ask people what we want? Being strategic is ugly and manipulative
- Humans cannot avoid influencing others. It's almost inevitable. If the game is unavoidable, better to be skilled at it

## Five Strategies for Becoming a Master Persuader
1. **Transform yourself into a deep listener** - We are usually more interested in our thoughts, feelings and experience than in those of the other person. We are eagerly waiting to say it out loud sometimes hence we don't listen. Think of it this way, each person you meet has a world full of information and experiences of their own, so why not listen to them? When you start listening, make sure you appear relaxed and convey that you are listening
2. **Infect people with the proper mood** - As humans, our moods tend to affect the people we're with. They reflect our same mood. Which is why we must be at our best state as much as possible. It's also the nonverbal cues that others pick up from us. A simple touch of people's hands or arms can have an impact, making them think positive things about you without ever being aware of the source their good opinions. But do not make eye contact, that becomes slightly sexual
3. **Confirm their self-opinion** - Make them feel like their perception of themselves is correct.
    - Like making them feel like their freely taking the decisions they are taking even if you're trying to influence it
    - That they're intelligent. Example: You can initially disagree with something they say and then later come to a conclusion that they were indeed right, this will make them feel better and be open to what you have to say
    - That they're good and moral. Example: You can do some harmless damage like offend someone subtly and then ask for their forgiveness. By asking forgiveness, you imply their moral superiority, people love to be in this state. Another example: If you need a favor from people, don't remind them of what you have done for them. Instead, remind them of the good things they've done for you in the past, this will confirm their self-opinion - "Yes I am generous". Then they will want to continue to live up to this image and help you again
4. **Ally their insecurities** - First, identify a person's insecurities (looks, creativity, masculinity, power status, etc). Be careful not to trigger it. Best strategy is to praise and flatter those qualities that people are most insecure about. This mostly works if the person is uncertain about their insecurity. For example, if the person knows that they're really bad at basketball and you tell them they're good, it might sound fake but if they're uncertain about their skills in basketball, praising them will work. Look for qualities people are uncerain about and offer reassurance. Never follow up a praise with a request for help. Your flattery is a setup and requires some time. It's also a good idea to add in some small criticisms sometimes to balance it out. Try to be as sincere as possible though, it's best to choose qualities to praise that you actually admire
5. **Use people's resistance and stubbornness** - Sometimes people don't like to do what others tell them, they're stubborn. With these type of people, you must not push it. Instead, try to be alongside with them. If they are rebelling, agree with their rebellion and tell them to keep on doing what they're doing. It now means that they're doing what you're saying, this is distasteful to them. They may then stop doing it

## The Flexible Mind - Self Strategies
- When we're children, our minds are remarkably flexible. We could learn at a rate that far surpasses our adult capacities
- It could be because, as children, we feel weak and vulnerable as we have very little knowledge compared to the grown ups, so we try our best to be better
- As we grow, our body tightens and so does our mind. Just as we feel motivated to learn in our childhood because of the sense of weakness and vulnerability, in our adulthood we have sense of superiority which close us off from new ideas
- The ideal state of mind is one that retains the flexibility of youth with the reasoning powers of the adult
- When it comes to your self-opinion, make sure you're aware of it's existence and how it operates within you
- Understand that you're not as free as you think you are, in terms of making decisions. You conform to opinions of the group you're with. You buy some products because of subliminal influence
